Once around Hyperion.
So, Hyperion, the eighth moon of Saturn,
was one of the first objects to be
discovered that was small enough so that
gravity had
not been able to pull it into a fully
rounded shape. Um below about 500 km,
maybe 250 km, something like that,
depending on the the strength of
material, objects are unable to um
resist the pull of gravity if they're
larger and end up in the most economical
shape.
So, Hyperion was discovered
in 1848 on the 16th of September by
William Bond and his son George
and
then 2 days later by William Lassell,
famous astronomer, who managed to get
his manuscript out first. Always
important to publish first. So, the
discovery is really kind of shared
between the
two Williams and the George here.
Magnitude 14.1,
pretty faint, on the limit of
detectability from my backyard
observatory, but relatively easy for
larger telescopes to be able to do that.
And named Hyperion
because Hyperion is the
uh god of watchfulness, one of the
Titans, elder brother of Cronus, which
is Saturn from the opposite mythology,
and the
other seven moons known to that point
for Saturn had recently been named with
suggestions from John Herschel there,
who had come up with the idea. So,
adding another Titan seemed logical.
It orbits around Saturn in just over 21
days, 1 and 1/2 million kilometers away
from the planet, a slightly elliptical
path, and it's in a resonant orbit with
Titan. So, there is a 4:3 orbital
relationship between Hyperion and Titan,
and that retains the stability of the
orbits, so that the perturbations all
cancel out over the longest period.
Eighth largest moon of Saturn, not
spherical as I said, slightly irregular,
around about 135 kilometers
along its long axis, and
the ninth most massive of Saturn's
moons. So, eighth largest, but ninth in
terms of mass at 5 * 10 ^ 18 kg.
And if you calculate the volume and the
mass, you can work out the density, and
it turns out to be very lightweight, 0.5
g per cubic centimeter, mostly ice,
uh probably with significant voids,
otherwise the density would be nearly
double that figure, round about the
density of pure water.
That means it's got a very low escape
velocity,
less than 100 m/s,
and out at Saturn the solar heating is
quite low, so we're talking 90 K for the
surface temperature there.
Now, we do have uh the comparison
size-wise between Ceres and the Earth's
moon and
um
Hyperion there. Uh
but we also have a fantastic photograph,
and really this photograph intrigued me
when I saw it. The surface is fairly
dark with a little bit of a red tinge
that this black and white image isn't
showing,
but the main thing is it's covered in
these sharp rimmed craters
that seem to to be picked out with
bright material around the rim and then
darker material in the bottom. And that
darker material does indeed in some
photographs look redder and is the red
long-chain organic molecules. Very very
interesting that such things exist on
these objects.
And the theory is that the low density
and the voids inside the structure of
Hyperion
conspire with
the impactors when small space rocks fly
into the object, they don't impact the
the hard surface and detonate and
vaporize and create traditional craters.
They push hard down deep creating deep
craters with these sharp rims around
them.
Um and the ejecta
from the object that comes out as vapor
is mostly lost to space because of the
very low surface gravity.
Um and that's why this thing well,
frankly, it looks like a bath bomb,
doesn't it? But uh
uh it's just an amazing photograph.
We think it's probably a fragment of a
larger body.
Probably from something that was between
350 and 1,000 km in size and material
was ejected from this collision all
across the Saturnian system.
And a lot of that may have landed in
Titan's atmosphere and could explain why
Titan's atmosphere is rich in things
like
methane and other volatiles materials.
And that odd thing about Hyperion is
that it's tumbling. It has chaotic
rotation. It's not like so many objects
are tidally locked to keep one face
towards the primary. It's rolling and
tumbling so that it's moving around
multiple axes all at the same time and
this just makes its
aspect very very hard to predict as to
what it's going to be at some point in
the future.
This is
known as as a
Lyapunov time and
around about 36 hours down the road you
will just not know which way it's going
to be pointing. It's so chaotic with its
interactions with the other moons and
all the different tidal effects. It's
quite a bizarre path in terms of the way
it's spinning as it goes around Saturn.
Now, it seems in some
suggested papers that it seems to be
electrically charged and no doubt that
will fuel all sorts of crazy ideas that
it's an alien spacecraft or goodness
knows what but I don't know whether the
sort of consensus has really settled on
this one yet.
But it certainly does turn up in science
fiction and couple of books here.
There's Dan Simmons' Hyperion and Rogue
Moon there
as well. Mixed reviews about both of
these but if you're in the mood perhaps
worth taking a look at them and they're
set in and around various adventures
that occur on the moon Hyperion.
And so I'll just leave you with this
artist's impression of looking over the
surface of this bath bomb like moon at
another of Saturn's moons and the edge
on view of the rings there in the
background. So thanks very much for
listening.